*A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A CONTROVERSIAL HASHTAG: #ShoutYourAbortion*

*THE DATA SET*
Arielle and I selected the #ShoutYourAbortion data set (between November 27 and December 3rd) because it was sure to be interesting.  

*INITIAL OBJECTIVE*

After learning that the “Shout Your Abortion” movement took hold by way of a hashtag (through research on a final project for a 
different course), I looked it up on twitter. I was confused to find that the prominent content that day (in early November) 
reflected aggressive opposition to pro-choice. As a result, I approached this data set assignment with two questions: 
    1. What ratio of tweets using #ShoutYourAbortion maintain the pro-choice stance?
    2. Is the use of aggressive rhetoric distinctive between pro-choice and pro-life tweets?

*METHODOLOGY*

I made use of two add-ons in the attempt to answer these questions: 
    1. The “text analysis”-- “sentiment analysis” add-on labels selected data as subjective or objective, and as positive, 
neutral or negative. 
    2. The Gavagai Sentiments (GA) analysis scans selected data for levels of skepticism, love, hate, fear, desire and/or violence. 

After running the FIRST TOOL, I realized that without understanding precisely how the results were determined, 
I could be easily mislead. For example, a tweet is labeled “subjective” any time a first-person pronoun is used. 
While this works for original posts, it becomes less reliable in the assessment of retweets. Moreover, in some cases, 
due to abbreviated twitter language, pronouns are omitted: “2/2 &amp; have never looked back. Life=great.” For another 
more nuanced example, a tweet is considered “negative” wherein it makes use of negations such as “wasn’t” “don’t” and “no.”  
This form of analysis, while accurate in a grammatical sense, doesn’t speak to “sentiment,” as I understand it. 

The results of the SECOND TOOL were also rather limited. It can run a small set of data at a time, and adding additional 
data to other analysis results is difficult.  Also, GA doesn’t account for name-calling or profanity and searches, 
like google’s text analysis, for single words instead of phrases. As a result hateful and/or violent expressions are overlooked. 

    •	“To the brave ppl of #ShoutYourAbortion , keep up the good fight. To the trolls trying to shame them, fuck right off...”
    •	“... hahahaha ok moron...We will still #ShoutYourAbortion and u can't stop us. Suck a bag of dicks...”
    •	“I'm #thankful for #PlannedParenthood for keeping the black &amp; brown population in check. #UniteBlue...”

*OBJECTIVE/METHODOLOGY SHIFT*

Early into the data set analysis, I realized that tweets both for and against reproductive choice were equally prone 
to being ‘subjective,’ ‘negative’ and/or using divisive or antagonistic rhetoric. Determining who was for and against 
as well as evaluating communication styles requires a closer reading of a limited data set. I decided to focus on the 
data set of a single day, November 28.th The day after the Colorado Planned Parenthood (PP) clinic shooting provoked a 
decent quantity of interesting twitter activity. 

*THE RESULTS*

*"FOR"*

On November 28th, #ShoutYourAbortion is used 201 times.  163 of these tweets are in support of abortion.  106 of these are 
retweets most predominantly of three twitter accounts: @gogreen, @ProWomanChoice and @RyanCullen.  The @ProWomanChoice 
tweets are almost explicitly about the PP shooting.  Within the 163 tweets/retweets 24 violence-related words are used.  
13 of these uses are by way of retweet and of injustice-related words (placed in connection to women’s choices). 
2 make reference to “rape,” and 6 are in reference to the shooting.  The remaining 3 words are directed at other twitter users.  
1 of these is accusatory in nature: “...they're not "tiny humans." they're fetuses, nothing more. The women YOU violate and 
kill are people though...” 2 are in direct mockery of anti-abortion replies. 

Of the 201 total posts, 14 are identifiable as “positive” (2 of which, it ought to be noted, are made by tweeters who self-identify 
as white supremacists). 44 individual words are categorized as “positive’, 18 of which are considered as such due to their use 
(or reuse) of the word “win” within a tweet created by @RyanCullen90: “Don't like Abortion? Then don't have one.  Everyone wins. 
Debate Over. Mind your own business. #ShoutYourAbortion.” 

*"AGAINST"*

Of the 22 tweets I interpreted as supporting the ‘anti-abortion’ stance, 13 are original.  @MeganSm970 creates 9 of these. 
Although she is quite active on twitter and focuses primarily on anti-abortion arguments, she has only 172 followers.  
Her posts are somewhat extreme, but seem to avoid the use of personal attack or overt intentions to offend.  
She has, however, frequently been on the receiving end of such rhetorical approaches: “@MeganSm9707 Hi there, I just thought I’d 
tell you now that I killed [an] embryo and would happily kill 1,000 more.” 

Within the ‘anti-abortion’ list, only a handful is identifiable (through text analysis) as violent in sentiment. 
They are determined as such, by the GA, due to their use of words like as “kill,” “trauma,” “victims,” “death” and the 
very word itself, “violence.”  According to the textual analysis, 4 tweets are considered “negative,” due to words such as 
“evil,” “vile,” “wrong” “ignorance” and “misstatement.” Only 4 of the ‘anti-abortion’ tweets reference the Colorado shootings. 
@MeganSm9707 is the only tweeter to make use of  #ShoutYourAbortion to reject connections made between the PP shooting and the 
anti-abortion movement. 

What this data set did not show, but I was able to discover by following conversations directly on Twitter, was the 
extremely aggressive interactions that, while starting as a heated debate, quickly became personal and unconstructive.  
What the data also doesn’t show, is how many of these tweets are accompanied by violent images (the most extreme being a 
picture of a gun pointing at an infant’s head). 

*"OTHER"*

Of the 201 tweets using #ShoutYourAbortion on November 28th, 5 are not easily categorized. According to the sentiment 
analysis tool (#1), 2 of these are “neutral,” 2 are “positive,” and 1 is “negative.” None register within the GA. 
Strangely, at a closer reading the “other” category is arguably where the most intense display of derisive rhetoric can be found. 
As previously mentioned, two self-identify as white supremacists that celebrate abortion because, according to them, 
it keeps the “brown population in check.” But perhaps the most interesting and perplexing of these tweeters is @hboulware.  
She only shows up in this data set as using #ShoutYourAbortion once in a tweet that is mid-argument and responded to by 
three anti-abortion tweeters using the same hashtag. The in media res tweet does not indicate her stance.  
I looked up the account and discovered a journalist with 6432 followers that engaged, for multiple days, in steady exchange 
of hateful and aggressive dialogue with people on both sides of the issue.  These include explicit name-calling and, quite frankly, 
I was beginning to fear for her life.  On Dec 1, @dabears1973 sums it up her twitter feed quite effectively: 
“I could be in Twitter 24/7 for the rest of my life and never attract 1/6 of the nut jobs @hboulware does in one day. #Bravo.” 
This entire tirade, however, began on Nov 27, with her repetitive posts about how people were wrongfully 
jumping to conclusions regarding Dear’s motivations (the PP shooter). By December 2nd, @hboulware announced that she would 
be leaving twitter due to the intensity of negative exchange. (But, I looked back in on Dec 7th and she up and running 
[in similar style] once again).

*CONCLUSIONS*

The higher than normal volume of tweets on November 28th (as well as the few days following) are due to the 
Planned Parenthood shooting on the 27th.  Considering the timing, it is not surprising that those in support of abortion and 
Planned Parenthood would dominate the use of #ShoutYourAbortion.  It is also understandable that, out of respect for the lives lost, 
and the undesirability of being complicit to an act of terrorism, that many of those against reproductive choice would refrain 
from using a pro-choice hashtag to counter the movement at this time. It also makes sense—all personal perspectives aside—that 
the tweets against abortion would have the most grievous content because they are authored by those who are speaking out 
against what they believe to be no less than the murder of babies. Furthermore, the “pro-life” tweeters that would use a 
counter-stance hashtag to distribute tweets, are those which might be considered as aggressive communicators. 

